===== Page 24 =====
BIOLOGICAL
MOLECULES

INTRODUCTION TO BIOCHEMISTRY

Biochemistry is a branch of Biology, which deals with the study of chemical
components and the chemical processes in living organisms. A basic knowledge of
Biochemistry is essential for understanding anatomy and physiology, because all of the
structures of an organism have biochemical organization. For example, photosynthesis,
respiration, digestion, and muscle contraction can all be described in biochemical terms.

All living things are made of certain chemical compounds, which are generally
classified as organic and inorganic. The most important organic compounds in living
organisms are carbohydrates, proteins, lipids, and nucleic acids. Among inorganic
substances are water, carbon dioxide, acids, bases, and salts.

Typically an animal and a bacterial cell consist of chemicals as shown in the
following table.

Table 2.1 Chemical composition of a Bacterial and a Mammalian cell.

Proteins
Carbohydrates
Lipids
DNA
RNA
Other organic molecules — (Enzymes, hormones, metabolites)
Inorganic ions — (Na+, K+, Ca2+, Mg2+, Cl-, Fe2+/3+, SO4-2, etc.)

===== Page 25 =====
Cells of every organism are constantly taking in new substances and changing
them chemically in various ways, i.e. building new cellular materials and obtaining energy
for their needs. The life of an organism depends upon the ceaseless chemical activities in its
cells. This chemical activity is maintained with a high degree of organization. All the
chemical reactions taking place within a cell are collectively called metabolism.

Metabolic processes are characterized as anabolism and catabolism. Those reactions in
which simpler substances are combined to form complex substances are called anabolic
reactions. Anabolic reactions need energy. Energy is released by the breakdown of
complex molecules into simpler ones; such reactions are called catabolic reactions.
Anabolic and catabolic reactions go hand in hand in living cells. Complex molecules
are broken down and the resulting smaller molecules are reused to form new complex
molecules. Interconversions of carbohydrates, proteins, and lipids that occur continuously
in living cells are examples of coordinated catabolic and anabolic activities.

Carbon is the basic element of organic compounds. Due to its unique properties,
carbon occupies the central position in the skeleton of life.

Covalent bonds result when two or more atoms complete their electron shells by
sharing electrons. When an electron pair is shared between two atoms, a single
covalent bond results. An example is the bond between two hydrogen atoms to form
a hydrogen molecule. Covalent bonds store large amounts of energy.

When a carbon atom combines with four atoms or radicals, the four bonds are
arranged symmetrically in a tetrahedron, resulting in a stable configuration. The
stability associated with the tetravalency of carbon atoms makes it a favorable element
for the synthesis of complicated cellular structures. Carbon atoms can also combine
mutually, forming stable, branched or unbranched chains or rings. This ability of carbon is
responsible for the vast variety of organic compounds. C—C bonds form the skeleton of
organic molecules.

===== Page 26 =====
Carbon combines commonly with H, O, N, P and S. Combinations with these and
other elements contribute to the large variety of organic compounds. Carbon and
hydrogen bonds (C-H bonds) are the potential source of chemical energy for cellular
activities. Carbon-oxygen associations in glycosidic linkages provide stability to
complex carbohydrate molecules. Carbon combines with nitrogen in amino acid linkages
to form peptide bonds and proteins, which are very important due to their diversity
in structure and function.

Large organic molecules (macromolecules) such as cellulose, fats, and proteins
are generally insoluble in water, hence they form structures of cells. They also serve as
storage for smaller molecules like glucose, which in turn are responsible for providing
energy to the body.

Small molecules, such as glucose, amino acids, and fatty acids, serve either as a
source of energy or as subunits to build macromolecules. Some small molecules are so
unstable that they are immediately broken down to release energy, e.g. ATP. Such
substances serve as an immediate source of energy for cellular metabolism.

IMPORTANCE OF WATER

Water is the medium of life. It is the most abundant compound in all organisms.
It varies from 65 to 89 percent in different organisms. Human tissues contain about 20%
water in bone cells and 85% in brain cells. Almost all reactions of a cell occur in the
presence of water. It also takes part in many biochemical reactions such as hydrolysis of
macromolecules. It is also used as a raw material in photosynthesis.

Solvent properties:
Due to its polarity, water is an excellent solvent for polar substances.
Ionic substances, when dissolved in water, dissociate into positive and negative ions.
Non-ionic substances having charged groups in their molecules are dispersed in water.
When in solution, ions and molecules move randomly and are in a more favorable state
to react with other molecules and ions. It is because of this property of water that
almost all reactions in cells occur in aqueous media. In cells, all chemical reactions are
catalyzed by enzymes which work in aqueous environments. Nonpolar organic molecules,
such as fats, are insoluble in water and help to maintain membranes which make
compartments in the cell.

Heat capacity:
Water has a great ability to absorb heat with minimal change in its own
temperature. The specific heat capacity of water — the number of calories required to raise
the temperature of 1g of water from 15 to 16°C — is 1.0. This is because much of the
energy is used to break hydrogen bonds. Water thus works as a temperature stabilizer for
organisms in the environment and protects them from sudden thermal
changes.

===== Page 27 =====
Heat of vaporization:
Water absorbs much heat as it changes from liquid to gas. Heat of vaporization is
expressed as calories absorbed per gram vaporized. The specific heat of vaporization of
water is 574 Kcal/kg, which plays an important role in the regulation of heat produced by
oxidation. It also provides a cooling effect to plants when water is transpired, or to animals
when water is perspired. Evaporation of only 2 ml out of one liter of water lowers the
temperature of the remaining 998 ml by 1°C.

Ionization of water:
Water molecules ionize to form H+ and OH- ions:
H2O ⇌ H+ + OH-
This reaction is reversible but an equilibrium is maintained. At 25°C the concentration of
each of H+ and OH- ions in pure water is about 10^-7 mole/litre. The H+ and OH- ions
affect and take part in many of the reactions that occur in cells.

Protection:
Water is an effective lubricant that provides protection against damage resulting
from friction. For example, tears protect the surface of the eye from the rubbing of eyelids.

Carbohydrates occur abundantly in living organisms. They are found in all
organisms and in almost all parts of the cell. Cellulose of wood, cotton and paper,
starches present in cereals, root tubers, cane sugar and milk sugar are all examples of
carbohydrates. Carbohydrates play both structural and functional roles. Simple
carbohydrates are the main source of energy in cells. Some carbohydrates are the main
constituents of cell walls in plants and micro-organisms.

The word carbohydrate literally means hydrated carbons. They are composed of
carbon, hydrogen and oxygen, and the ratio of hydrogen and oxygen is the same as in water.
Their general formula is (Cx(H2O)y), where x is a whole number from three to many
thousands whereas y may be the same or a different whole number. Chemically, carbohydrates
are defined as polyhydroxy aldehydes or ketones, or complex substances which on
hydrolysis yield polyhydroxy aldehyde or ketone subunits. (Hydrolysis involves the breakdown
of large molecules into smaller ones utilizing water molecules).

The sources of carbohydrates are green plants. These are the primary products of
photosynthesis. Other compounds of plants are produced from carbohydrates by various
chemical changes.

Carbohydrates in cells combine with proteins and lipids and the resultant
compounds are called glycoproteins and glycolipids, respectively. Glycoproteins and
glycolipids have a structural role in the extracellular matrix of animals and bacterial cell
walls. Both these conjugated molecules are components of biological membranes.

===== Page 28 =====
Classification of Carbohydrates

Carbohydrates are also called ‘saccharides' (derived from the Greek word
‘sakcharon' meaning sugar) and are classified into three groups: 
(i) Monosaccharides 
(ii) Oligosaccharides 
(iii) Polysaccharides.

Monosaccharides: These are simple sugars. They are sweet in taste, easily soluble in
water, and cannot be hydrolyzed into simpler sugars. Chemically they are either
polyhydroxy aldehydes or ketones. All carbon atoms in a monosaccharide except one
have a hydroxyl group. The remaining carbon atom is either a part of an aldehyde group
or a keto group. The sugar with an aldehyde group is called an aldo-sugar, and with the keto
group a keto-sugar. An example is the two trioses sketched below:

CHO                CH2OH
 |                  |
H—C—OH           C=O
 |                  |
CH2OH            CH2OH

Aldehyde form: Glyceraldehyde
Keto form: Dihydroxyacetone

In nature, monosaccharides with 3 to 7 carbon atoms are found. They are called
trioses (3C), tetroses (4C), pentoses (5C), hexoses (6C), and heptoses (7C). They have
the general formula (CH2O)n, where n is a whole number from three to many thousands.

Two trioses mentioned above are intermediates in respiration and photosynthesis.
Tetroses are rare in nature and occur in some bacteria. Pentoses and hexoses are the most
common. From the biological point of view, the most important hexose is glucose. It is an
aldose sugar.

Structure of ribose (a pentose) and glucose (a hexose):