Of all the chemical reactions going on in a cell is known as metabolism. The life activities in the cells require enzymes so that their products can be utilized in biochemical reaction without being a catalysts and therefore they speed up the speed of chemical reaction.

Common properties of enzymes are:
(i) Required in very small quantity for the reaction.
(ii) Highly sensitive to pH and temperature.
(iii) Either highly specific or slightly less specific.
(iv) Can work in vivo (living cells) as well as in vitro (glassware).
(v) Some require co-factor for proper activity.
(vi) Lower the need of activation energy.
(vii) Only speed up a reaction and do not affect the equilibrium of the reaction.

ENZYME STRUCTURE

With exception of ribozymes, all the enzymes are globular proteins which are made up of one or more polypeptides. Ribozymes are the enzymes which consist of RNA and are found in ribosomes. For example, peptidyl transferase is a ribozyme which forms peptide bond during protein synthesis.

Shape of Enzymes and Components of an Active Site

Majority of enzymes which are protein in nature can have molecular weights ranging from about 10,000 to over 1 million. Such enzymes have tertiary or quaternary structures. The catalytic activity of an enzyme is located in its active site which is a specific charge bearing, three dimensional cavity. The substrate (the reactant which is to be converted into product) molecule is attached to the active site by non-covalent interactions like hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic interactions. Active site consists of 3-12 amino acids which may be scattered in the polypeptide but are brought together in a particular fashion due to secondary and tertiary folding of the protein molecule, e.g., the active site of aldolase consists of glycine, lysine, and alanine amino acids. The active site consists of two functional regions, i.e., binding site and catalytic site. Some amino acids at binding site which makes bonds with substrate constitute the binding site. The amino acids at catalytic site are responsible for conversion of substrate into product.

Cofactors

Some enzymes also require a non-protein part, the cofactor which is not only responsible for the attachment of substrate to the active site but also participate in catalytic process. The final shape of active site is established after the attachment of cofactor. An enzyme which requires a cofactor is active only if the cofactor is combined with it. Such an active enzyme is called holoenzyme. If the cofactor is not available the remaining protein part of enzyme is catalytically inactive and is called apoenzyme. On the other hand, the enzyme which does not require cofactor can also show active and inactive states. Pepsin is an example of such enzyme. It is secreted by gastric gland from stomach wall in an inactive form pepsinogen. In this state, it has an additional polypeptide fragment attached to its active site which does not allow the binding of substrate hence it remains inactive. The additional polypeptide is removed and as a result active site is exposed in HCl (as in stomach) and pepsinogen is converted into active (holoenzyme) form, pepsin.

Types of Cofactors
Cofactors may be inorganic or organic molecules. The inorganic cofactors are ions such as Fe²⁺, Mg²⁺, Cu²⁺, Zn²⁺, etc. These are only attached to the enzyme when required and are detachable cofactors. Such cofactors are called activators. The organic cofactors are co-enzymes or prosthetic groups. Examples are ATP, NAD⁺, FAD, etc. A prosthetic group is a covalently bonded part of an enzyme and does not detach after the completion of reaction, e.g., porphyrin ring attached to some enzymes like cytochromes.

MECHANISM OF ENZYME ACTION

For a reaction to occur the substrate first binds to the active site of the enzyme to form enzyme-substrate (ES) complex, then the substrate is converted into product while attached to the enzyme (EP complex), and finally the product is released, thus allowing the enzyme to start all over again.

Essentially, the enzyme can make the local conditions inside the active site quite different from those outside (such as pH, water concentration, charge), so that the reaction is more likely to happen. For example, if a substrate is to be split, a bond might be stretched by the enzyme, making it more likely to break.

Models of Enzyme Action

The mechanism of enzyme action can be explained with the help of two different models.

Lock and Key Model
Emil Fischer proposed Lock and key model (in 1894). According to this model the active site of the enzyme has definite shape and rigid structure. Shape of active site is complementary to the shape of substrate. Therefore, a particular substrate can only bind to the active site. The active site remains unchanged during or after the reaction. Lock and key model assumes that like a particular key opens a particular lock, a specific enzyme acts upon a particular substrate (lock). Actually, the notched portion of the key is equivalent to the active site on the enzyme. It reflects that enzymes are highly specific in nature and each enzyme can carry out only one particular reaction. The enzymes, which show a broad range of specificity towards substrates, are the exceptions. An enzyme can catalyze only one substrate showing absolute specificity, e.g., urease.

Urease → Ammonia + Carbon dioxide

Induced Fit Model
Induced fit model (in 1958) was proposed by Daniel Koshland. According to this model the active site is not a rigid structure, it is modified as the substrate interacts with enzyme. The amino acids in the active site are molded into a precise shape which enables the enzyme to perform its catalytic function more effectively. The change which is induced in the active site is responsible for the conversion of substrate into product. As the reaction is completed the active site regains its original shape. This is the flexibility of active site which allows more than one type of related substrates to be attached on active site. Such an enzyme can carry out more than one type of related reactions. The example is carbonic anhydrase which can add O₂ to haemoglobin, as well as can control the levels of carbonic acid and bicarbonates in blood.

The enzymes, which follow the induced fit mechanism, are called regulatory or allosteric enzymes, for example hexokinase.

Hb + 4O₂ → Carbonic anhydrase → Hb4O₂ (Oxyhaemoglobin)
H₂O + CO₂ → Carbonic anhydrase → H₂CO₃ (Carbonic acid)
H₂CO₃ → Carbonic anhydrase → H⁺ + HCO₃⁻ (Bicarbonate)

ACTIVATION ENERGY

The amount of energy required to achieve the transition state of molecules or to break the existing bonds is called activation energy. This state is achieved by biochemical catalysts. The enzyme (E) reacts with reactant (A) to form an activated AE transitional complex. The activation energy is the energy which AE complex reaches to the transition state. The AE complex then reacts with another reactant B to form AB and release enzyme. The enzyme does decrease the energy of activation by changing an energy dependent process into an energy independent process. Thus the energy of activation is “energy required to break existing bonds and begin the reaction”. An enzyme greatly reduces the activation energy necessary to initiate a chemical reaction.

FACTORS AFFECTING THE RATE OF ENZYMATIC ACTION

The rate of enzymatic action is measured by the amount of substrate changed or product formed per unit time. The external conditions which affect the rate of enzyme controlled reactions are: temperature, pH, concentration of enzyme and substrate.

Effect of Temperature
Enzymes are very sensitive to temperature. A rise in temperature increases the rate of reaction but only to a point. Each enzyme has a specific temperature at which it works at its maximum rate. This temperature is called optimum temperature. The optimum temperature for most human enzymes is between 35°C to 40°C. A temperature 10°C below the optimum temperature slows down the reaction and a temperature 10°C above the optimum temperature can denature the enzyme. If the temperature rises beyond the optimum temperature, the enzyme activity declines and the enzyme is said to be denatured. The enzyme unfolds and the precise structure of the active site is gradually lost. The temperature which causes denaturation of enzyme is called maximum temperature. The bonds which are most sensitive to temperature change are hydrogen bonds. All human enzymes have an optimum temperature of 37-38°C, but bacteria living in hot springs have an optimum temperature of 70°C or higher. Such enzymes have been used in biological detergents for high temperature washes. If temperature is reduced to near or below freezing point, the enzyme is inactivated, not denatured. They will regain their catalytic influence when optimum temperatures are restored. This temperature where an inactive enzyme can regain activity is called minimum temperature.

Effect of pH
Each enzyme functions most effectively over a particular pH range. This narrow range of pH where the maximum rate of reaction is achieved is called optimum pH. Enzyme is sensitive to pH changes because pH influences the charges on amino acid side chains that are involved in maintaining tertiary and quaternary structure of enzyme. A change in optimum pH of an enzyme causes ionization of amino acid of active site and changes their shape temporarily. On the other hand, extreme changes in pH can change the charge on acidic and basic groups of enzyme and therefore disrupts the ionic bonding (salt bridges) that helps to maintain the specific shape of the enzyme.

The optimum pH values for most enzymes fall in the range of pH 6-8, but there are exceptions. Some enzymes like papain from green papaya act both in acidic and alkaline media. Protein digesting enzyme pepsin is active in acidic medium at pH 2 and trypsin is inactive at this pH but shows maximum activity in alkaline medium at pH 8.

Effect of Enzyme Concentration
If there is an excess of substrate molecules, the rate of reaction is directly proportional to the enzyme concentration. By increasing the amount of enzyme in the system it can increase the rate of conversion of substrates into products but only to a certain limit. By increasing concentration of enzyme, the number of active sites become more and therefore the rate of conversion of substrate becomes fast. Such effect persists till equilibrium state (when concentration of substrate and product becomes equal), after that increase in enzyme concentration will have no effect upon rate of reaction.

Effect of Substrate Concentration
If other conditions such as pH and temperature are kept constant and the enzyme concentration is maintained at a higher level (saturated availability), the increase in substrate concentration (S) increases the velocity (V) of the enzymatic reaction at first. The reaction ultimately reaches a maximum velocity at equilibrium state. The rise in V is decreased progressively with increase in S. The reaction does not proceed by any further rise in substrate concentration. This is because all the active sites of enzyme molecules are occupied by the substrates (saturation) and no active site is left to bind with additional molecules of the substrate.

ENZYME INHIBITION

The condition in which an enzyme fails to catalyze its reaction is called enzyme inhibition and the molecules which attach to the enzyme but are not converted into desired products are called enzyme inhibitors. In general, the inhibitors slow down the catalytic action of enzymes.

Competitive Inhibition
In competitive inhibition, the inhibitor is a substance which closely resembles the substrate in its molecular structure. Therefore, it competes with the substrate for the active site of the enzyme. However, it is not similar enough to the substrate in the chemical reaction and the enzyme cannot convert it into products. Competitive inhibition is also called reversible inhibition. This means that the level of inhibition depends upon the relative concentrations of substrate and inhibitor, since they are competing for places in enzyme active sites. Therefore, if the concentration of the substrate is increased relative to the concentration of the inhibitor, the active site will usually be occupied by the substrate. An example of inhibitor is malonate. The reaction of formation of fumarate from succinate is catalyzed by succinate dehydrogenase that is competitively inhibited by malonate.

Significance of competitive inhibitors is: (a) It supports lock and key hypothesis. (b) Substances which are similar to substrate are not acted upon by enzymes. (c) Competitive inhibitors are used as drugs in the control of bacterial pathogens. Antibiotics known as sulphonamides are used to combat bacterial infection.

Non-Competitive Inhibitors
In non-competitive inhibition the inhibitor molecule binds to an enzyme at a site other than active site. The other binding site of enzyme is called allosteric site. The binding of inhibitor at allosteric site changes the shape of active site. As a result, the substrate cannot bind to the active site. So non-competitive inhibitors prevent the formation of enzyme-substrate complexes, but do not prevent the substrate from being converted into product if it is already attached. This is an example of reversible non-competitive inhibition. On the other hand, an irreversible non-competitive inhibitor permanently destroys the enzyme by altering its shape so that one substrate cannot attach. Examples of irreversible non-competitive inhibitors include cyanides and organophosphates. Cyanides are potent inhibitors of respiration and can kill an organism because they inhibit cytochrome oxidase activity of mitochondria. Organophosphates like Di-Isopropyl fluorophosphate (DFP- nerve gas) inhibit these enzymes by combining with serine residue at the active site. Ions of heavy metals such as mercury, silver and copper (Hg²⁺, Ag⁺, and Cu²⁺) combine with thiol (SH) groups in the enzyme breaking the disulphide bridges. These bridges are important in maintaining tertiary structure. When these bridges are broken, the enzyme becomes denatured and inactive.

Feedback Inhibition
The activity of almost every enzyme in a cell can be regulated by its product. If an enzyme is inhibited by its own product, it is called feedback inhibition. This is a type of reversible non-competitive inhibition. This phenomenon is a part of normal regulatory mechanism and usually happens during the regulation of metabolic pathways. For example, the amino acid aspartate becomes the amino acid threonine by a sequence of five enzymatic reactions. When threonine, the end product of this pathway, is present in excess, it binds to an allosteric site on enzyme 1 on this pathway and then the active site is no longer able to bind aspartate. When all the threonine is consumed in cellular events, the threonine molecule which is attached to the allosteric site is also removed; the pathway resumes its activity once again.

CLASSIFICATION OF ENZYMES

Enzymes have been classified into six groups by International Union of Biochemistry (in 1961):

Oxidoreductases

Transferases

Hydrolases

Lyases

Isomerases

Ligases

Oxidoreductases
These catalyze redox reactions. They catalyze the transfer of electrons or H⁺ ions from or to their substrate and act by adding or removing hydrogen atoms. Example: cytochrome oxidase.

Transferases
These enzymes catalyze the transfer of a functional group other than hydrogen from one molecule to another. The chemical process is called group transfer. Example: hexokinase transfers a phosphate group from ATP to glucose during synthesis of glucose-6-phosphate.

Hydrolases
These catalyze hydrolysis reactions. They cause breakdown of specific covalent bonds and addition of water. Example: proteases which breakdown proteins into peptones and peptides. Other digestive enzymes that work in digestive tract are hydrolases.

Lyases
These catalyze the removal of a group from substrate to leave a double bond. Example: histidine decarboxylase breaks the C-C bond of histidine to release carbon dioxide and histamine.

Isomerases
These catalyze the rearrangement of atoms in a molecule to form its isomer.

Ligases
These catalyze the joining together of two molecules. The energy is provided by ATP. Such enzymes are responsible for linking monomers to form polymers.

Classification based upon substrate
Enzymes can be classified on the basis of substrates they use. Some of the classes are: proteases, lipases, carbohydrases and nucleases.

Proteases
These enzymes act upon proteins. Examples are: pepsin and trypsin (both digest proteins into small polypeptides or peptones), aminopeptidases and carboxypeptidases (both digest peptones into dipeptides) and erepsin (digest dipeptides into amino acids).

Lipases
These enzymes hydrolyze lipids into fatty acids and glycerols. Examples are gastric lipases and pancreatic lipases.

Carbohydrases
These enzymes cause breakdown of carbohydrates. Examples are:

Amylase (digest starch or glycogen into maltose)

Cellulase (digest cellulose into cellubiose, a disaccharide)

Maltase (digest maltose into glucoses)

Sucrase (digest sucrose into glucose and fructose)

Lactase (digest lactose into galactose and glucose)

How are enzymes named?
(a) Enzymes are named by adding “ase” to the name of substrate they act, e.g., proteases, lipases etc.
(b) Enzymes are named according to the types of reaction they catalyse, e.g., oxidases, reductases etc.
(c) Enzymes are named by taking into consideration both the substrate acted upon and the type of reaction catalysed, e.g., DNA-polymerase.
(d) Some enzymes are named as per substance synthesized, e.g., rhodonase catalyses synthesis of rhodonate from hydrocyanic acid and sodium thiosulphate.

How are enzymes formed?
Enzymes are proteins, so they are formed as per message or base sequence in DNA. Enzymes are synthesized by living cells but they retain their catalytic action even when extracted from cells, i.e., they can act in vitro. These days enzymes are also being produced by recombinant DNA technology.