Viruses
The term "virus" is derived from a Latin word “venom” meaning ‘poison’. In the past, the term was associated with infectious diseases which had an unknown cause. The first evidence of a virus came in 1884 when Charles Chamberland, who worked with Louis Pasteur, found that the causative agents of rabies could pass through a porcelain filter (pore size of 100–1000 nm). Such filters could completely remove bacteria or other known cells from a liquid suspension.

Tobacco mosaic disease was thought to be caused by bacteria. In 1892, Dmitri Ivanowsky extracted juice from the leaves of tobacco plants with tobacco mosaic disease. To remove bacteria, the juice was passed through a porcelain filter. He then rubbed the filtered juice onto the leaves of healthy plants, expecting no disease to develop, but the healthy leaves soon developed symptoms of the disease.

By 1900, similar disease-producing substances had been discovered in both plants and animals. The name "filterable viruses" was given to these substances. W. M. Stanley crystallized the infectious particle, now known as tobacco mosaic virus (TMV), in 1935. Subsequently, many viruses have been seen with the help of the electron microscope. The study of viruses is called virology.

Characteristics of Viruses
Viruses show characteristics of both living and nonliving things.

Living Characteristics:

Viruses occur in different varieties or strains.

They have genetic material in the form of either DNA or RNA that can undergo mutation.

They can reproduce using the metabolic machinery of the host cell they infect.

They enter the host cell and cause disease, i.e., they are intracellular obligate parasites.

They get transmitted from one host to another.

Non-living Characteristics:

They lack an enzyme system and do not have metabolic activity of their own.

They can be crystallized and stored in bottles.

They do not respire. Viruses behave as nonliving, inert chemicals outside the host cell.

Structure of a Virus
A virus has a simple structure. A complete viral particle is called a virion. Primarily, it can be divided into two parts:

Genome: The core of the virus, made of either DNA or RNA (single or double-stranded).

Capsid: A protective coat of protein surrounding the genome. The capsid is composed of protein subunits called capsomeres. The number and arrangement of capsomeres is specific for each type of virus. For example, the herpes virus has 162 capsomeres, and the adenovirus that causes the common cold contains 252 capsomeres.

Symmetry in Virus Capsid:

Icosahedral Symmetry: When capsomeres are arranged to form a polyhedron with 12 vertices and 20 faces. Two types of capsomers constitute the icosahedral capsid: pentagonal (pentons) at the vertices and hexagonal (hexons) on the faces. There are always twelve pentons, but the number of hexons varies.

Helical Symmetry: When capsomeres are arranged in a helical fashion, the capsid appears rod-shaped.

Complex Symmetry: Some viruses, like bacteriophages, have a complex structure combining both shapes.

Many animal viruses have an additional viral envelope around the capsid, which is derived from the host cell's surface membrane during the budding process. This envelope contains virally encoded protein spikes that help them attach to the host cell.

Classification of Virus
Virus classification is based either on host organisms or on other structural characters such as genome type and mode of action in the host. The internationally agreed system is based on the structure and composition of the virus particle (morphology); the mode of replication is also important.

David Baltimore, a Nobel Prize-winning biologist, devised the Baltimore classification system, which places viruses into one of seven groups based on their mode of replication and genome type.

Based on Host:

Plant Viruses: Many types of viral plant diseases are known. Most plant viruses are RNA viruses, e.g., tobacco mosaic virus (TMV). Many are rod-like, e.g., potato yellow dwarf virus.

Animal Viruses: Occur as parasites in animals. Viruses cause foot and mouth disease in cattle. Rous sarcoma virus causes cancer in animals. In many viral infections, viruses remain localized in the human body, causing symptoms like smallpox. Picornavirus causes the common cold.

Based on Structure and Genome:

DNA Viruses:

Double-stranded (dsDNA), e.g., smallpox virus.

Single-stranded (ssDNA), e.g., mild rash virus.

RNA Viruses:

Double-stranded (dsRNA), e.g., diarrhea virus.

Single-stranded (ssRNA); serves as mRNA, e.g., Rubella virus.

Single-stranded (ssRNA); template for mRNA synthesis, e.g., Influenza virus.

Single-stranded (ssRNA); template for DNA synthesis, e.g., HIV (a retrovirus).

Host Specificity
Viruses are parasitic in nature. They are highly specific to their host. Bacteriophage infects only bacteria, the tobacco mosaic virus infects only tobacco plants, and the rabies virus infects only mammals. Some human viruses specialize in a particular tissue. HIV will enter only certain types of white blood cells; the poliovirus reproduces in spinal nerve cells, and hepatitis viruses infect only liver cells. Human cold viruses infect only the cells lining the respiratory tract. Viruses have protein spikes on their surfaces that help them attach to specific receptors on the host cells. The specificity of attachment determines the host range of the virus. Some viruses have a narrow range (e.g., poliovirus infects only humans and other primates), whereas others have a broad range (e.g., rabies virus can infect all mammalian cells).

Viruses must require a host cell to complete their life cycle.
A virus must find a host cell to parasitize to complete its life cycle because viruses are obligate intracellular parasites, meaning they cannot multiply outside a living cell. They can infect all sorts of cells, from bacterial to human cells. An isolated virus is unable to reproduce or do anything else except infect an appropriate host cell. Viruses lack enzymes, ribosomes, etc., for making proteins. Therefore, they need to enter a host cell to complete their life cycle.

Life outside the host
Under unfavorable conditions outside the host, viruses enter a dormant period as they do not have their own metabolism. The genome of the virus remains protected inside the capsid. Viruses can survive for long periods; non-enveloped viruses survive for longer time periods. Enveloped viruses survive for shorter periods as the lipid envelope is sensitive to degradation by sunlight, heat, and detergents.

BACTERIOPHAGE
The bacteriophage, or simply phage, is a virus that attacks bacteria.

Structure
It is generally a tadpole-shaped virus. It consists of a head, neck, and tail. The head is icosahedral. The inner core of the head consists of a double-stranded DNA genome. Below the head is a neck or collar which separates the head and tail. The tail is a hollow tube made up of proteins through which nucleic acid passes during infection. The tail is surrounded by a contractile sheath, which contracts during infection of the bacterium. At the end of the tail, a base plate is present which possesses about six tail fibres around it and several tail pins or spikes at its lower surface. The tail fibres and tail pins are involved in the binding of the phage to the bacterial cell. At the bottom of the core tube of the tail, an enzyme, lysozyme, is present.

Infection Process
The main steps of the infection process of bacteriophages are:

Adsorption: The binding of the phage to the bacterial cell. This step is mediated by the tail fibres and tail pins. Phages attach to specific receptor sites on the bacterial cell.

Penetration: The binding results in the contraction of the sheath and the release of lysozyme, which dissolves a portion of the bacterial envelope. As a result, the hollow core tube is inserted through the bacterial envelope. The insertion of the core tube is called penetration.

Injection: The penetration of the core results in the injection of viral DNA into the bacterial cytoplasm, while the remainder of the phage remains on the outside of the bacterium.

Replication of Bacteriophage in Lytic Cycle
A bacteriophage that performs the lytic cycle is called a lytic or virulent phage because it ultimately causes lysis (breakdown) of its host cell after its own multiplication. It develops a destructive relationship with the host cell because the host genomic DNA is immediately degraded by a virally encoded DNA-digesting enzyme (DNAase). Since viral DNA is protected by certain chemical modifications, such enzymes do not affect it. The degradation of host DNA enables the viral DNA to take over the control of the whole metabolic machinery of its host. In the lytic cycle, the subsequent steps are the synthesis of phage components, assembly, maturation, lysis, and release. After the degradation of host DNA, phage-specified mRNAs and proteins are synthesized. These include the structural proteins (head, tail) that comprise the phage as well as the enzymes needed for the lysis of the bacterial cell. Nucleic acid and proteins are separately synthesized and then assembled into mature virions. Finally, the bacterial cell is lysed, releasing the new phages.

Replication of Bacteriophage in Lysogenic Cycle
A bacteriophage that performs the lysogenic cycle is called a temperate phage. In this cycle, the phage DNA does not immediately take control of the host's machinery. Instead, it integrates itself into the bacterial chromosome. This integrated state of phage DNA is called a prophage. This integrating phage DNA is called a temperate phage, and the bacteria harboring it are called lysogenic bacteria. The prophage is replicated along with the bacterial DNA prior to binary fission. The lysogenic state of a bacterium can be terminated anytime when it is exposed to certain conditions; this is called induction. Conditions that favor the termination of the lysogenic cycle include starvation, exposure to UV or ionizing radiation, and exposure to certain chemicals. The separated phage DNA then initiates the lytic cycle, resulting in cell lysis and the release of new phages, which are then capable of infecting new susceptible bacteria.

Uses of Bacteriophage
a) Phage DNA has also been used as a vector in genetic engineering for the development of genomic libraries (a collection of bacteria harboring multiple copies of all the genes of an individual's genome).
b) Phage therapy is the application of genetically engineered phages that can kill pathogenic bacteria. Phage therapy has advantages over conventional antibiotic therapy. As phages are highly specific, they have a narrow spectrum of activity, meaning it is possible to kill only the targeted pathogenic bacteria, avoiding harm to the normal bacterial flora (our good bacteria).
c) Bacteriophages have been used for many years as tools for the treatment of bacterial infections, but recently a new application in antibacterial nanomedicines has been discovered in which bacteriophages can be formulated as targeted drug-delivery vehicles.

HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS (HIV)
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is the causative agent of acquired immune deficiency syndrome or AIDS. It was identified in 1984 by research teams from the Pasteur Institute in France and the National Institute of Health in the USA. The virus was named HIV in 1986.

Structure of Human Immunodeficiency Virus
Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) is a retrovirus. It is spherical in shape. The outer covering is a lipoprotein envelope which consists of two layers of lipids; different proteins are embedded in the viral envelope, forming “spikes” consisting of the outer glycoprotein (gp) 120 and the transmembrane gp41. The lipid membrane is borrowed from the host cell during the budding process. gp120 is needed to attach to the host cell, and gp41 is critical for the cell fusion process. Beneath the envelope, another protein shell is present which is made up of matrix proteins. It lies between the envelope and the capsid. The HIV capsid is somewhat conical and is composed of capsomers. The viral core contains two single strands of HIV RNA and the enzymes needed for HIV replication, such as reverse transcriptase, integrase, and protease. The reverse transcriptase enzyme is used to convert the viral RNA genome into a viral DNA genome, the integrase enzyme is used to incorporate viral DNA into host DNA, and the protease enzyme is used to break large structural proteins into smaller units.

Life Cycle of HIV

Attachment: The virus attaches to the host cell (CD4 T-lymphocyte) via the gp120 envelope protein binding to the CD4 receptor on the host cell surface.

Entry: Fusion takes place, and the virion enters the cell by endocytosis. Once inside, it loses its protective coat (uncoating occurs), releasing viral RNA into the cytoplasm along with viral enzymes.

Reverse Transcription: The enzyme reverse transcriptase synthesizes a single-stranded DNA complementary to the viral RNA (cDNA).

RNA Degradation: The original viral RNA is degraded by the ribonuclease (RNAase) enzyme.

DNA Synthesis: The single-stranded DNA is converted to form double-stranded cDNA.

Integration: The double-stranded cDNA then moves into the nucleus and is integrated into the host cell DNA. This process is mediated by the viral enzyme integrase. The integrated viral DNA is now called a provirus.

Transcription: Viral mRNA is transcribed from the proviral DNA by the host's RNA polymerase.

Translation: During transcription, not only viral mRNAs for new virions are formed, but viral genomic RNA is also produced. The mRNAs are translated by host ribosomes into several large polyproteins.

Cleavage: These polyproteins are then cleaved by the viral protease to form the individual viral proteins and enzymes.

Assembly & Release: New viral particles are assembled and released from the host cell by budding off and enclosing themselves in a piece of the host cell membrane.

Symptoms and Stages of AIDS

Initial Infection: The initial infection may be asymptomatic or may show flu-like symptoms (fever, headache, tiredness).

Asymptomatic Carrier: After the initial symptoms disappear, there may be no other symptoms for nine months or longer. Although the individual appears healthy, he or she is highly infectious. The standard HIV blood test becomes positive during this stage.

AIDS Related Complex (ARC): The most common symptoms are swollen lymph glands in the neck, armpit, or groin that persist for months. Other symptoms are night sweats, fever, cough, flu, persistent diarrhea, loss of memory, and depression.

Full-blown AIDS: This is the final stage. It involves severe weight loss and weakness, persistent diarrhea, and usually one of several opportunistic infections.

Opportunistic Diseases
HIV does not cause disease or kill directly; it only destroys T-cells of the immune system. The decrease in immunity results in the body's inability to fight diseases. A person suffering from AIDS is attacked by diseases called opportunistic diseases, e.g., skin cancer, fungal infections, viral infections, gastrointestinal diseases, respiratory diseases, and nervous system and eye diseases.

Treatment of AIDS
HIV is treated using a combination of medicines to fight HIV infection. This is called antiretroviral therapy (ART). ART is not a cure, but it can control the virus so that an HIV-positive person can live a longer, healthier life and reduce the risk of transmitting HIV to others. ART is a highly effective treatment for HIV infection, preventing disease progression in most recipients. However, ART can have toxicities, is often costly, and requires strict daily pill-taking, which can affect the quality of life. Because of these limitations, a cure for HIV infection remains a major goal for research.

Transmission of HIV
HIV is transmitted through:

Unprotected sexual contact with an infected person.

Transfusion of contaminated blood or blood products.

Use of contaminated syringes and needles.

From an infected mother to her child during pregnancy, birth, or breastfeeding.

HIV is not transmitted by:

Shaking hands, sneezing, or swimming in the same pool.

Inanimate objects such as toilets, door knobs, telephones, or office furniture.

Mosquitoes or other insects.

A mother having HIV should not feed her babies (breastfeeding).

Prevalence of AIDS
According to UNAIDS (2016):

Approximately 36.7 million people were living with HIV globally (end of 2015).

2.1 million people became newly infected with HIV in 2015.

New infections among children have declined by 50% since 2010.

Around 1.1 million people died from AIDS-related illnesses in 2015.

In Pakistan, it is estimated that 400,000 people are living with HIV/AIDS, but only 15,370 are registered. AIDS cases in Pakistan grew at an average of 17.6 percent per year between 2005 and 2015, the highest increase in the world. The highest number of patients were reported in Punjab (558), followed by Islamabad (522), Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (468), and Baluchistan (215).

VIRAL DISEASES
This section describes the causative agent, symptoms, treatment, transmission, and prevention of hepatitis, herpes, polio, and cotton leaf curl disease.

Hepatitis
Hepatitis is generally characterized as inflammation of the liver, leading to the malfunction of the liver and other symptoms. It can be acute (relatively rapid onset) or chronic (slowly progressing). The most common causes of viral hepatitis are Hepatitis A, B, C, D, and E viruses.

Hepatitis A (Infectious Hepatitis): Caused by HAV. Transmission: Fecal-oral route. Symptoms: Fever, nausea, and jaundice. Treatment: No specific treatment. Prevention: Active immunization with a vaccine and proper hygiene.

Hepatitis B (Serum Hepatitis): Caused by HBV. Transmission: Through blood, sexual contact, and prenatally from mother to newborn. Treatment: Alpha interferon. Prevention: A vaccine is highly effective. All blood should be screened.

Hepatitis C: Caused by HCV. Transmission: Primarily through blood. Symptoms: Similar to hepatitis B. Treatment: A combination of alpha interferon and ribavirin. Prevention: No vaccine is available. Blood should be screened.

Hepatitis D: Caused by an RNA viroid. It can only infect a human liver cell if it is enclosed in a capsid that contains a binding protein, which it gets from the hepatitis B virus (it is a satellite virus). Transmission: Via blood or serum transfusions. Symptoms: As in hepatitis B but more severe. Treatment and Prevention: Same as for HBV.

Hepatitis E: Caused by HEV. Transmission: Fecal-oral route. Treatment and Prevention: No antiviral treatment or vaccine exists. Observation of proper hygiene is key.

Herpes Simplex
Herpes simplex is a superficial viral infection characterized by one or more painful, fluid-filled sores or blisters on the skin or epithelium. Tingling, itching, or burning may occur before the blisters appear. Blisters break open, ooze fluid, and form a crust before healing. The sores can last 7 to 10 days.

Oral Herpes (Cold Sores): Caused by HSV Type-1. Transmission: Primarily through oral secretions (saliva) or physical contact with sores. Can be spread by sharing objects. Blisters appear on the lips, around the mouth, or on the face. Treatment: Antiviral drugs.

Genital Herpes: Caused by HSV Type-2. Transmission: Primarily through sexual contact. Sores appear on the genitals. Treatment: Antiviral drugs. Prevention: Avoidance of sexual contact with an infected person.

Polio (Poliomyelitis)

Cause: Poliovirus, an enterovirus.

Transmission: Fecal-oral route.

Symptoms: The virus invades the central nervous system, destroying motor neurons, which can result in paralysis of the limbs (often the legs) and respiratory muscles.

Treatment: No specific antiviral therapy. Physiotherapy for the affected muscles.

Prevention: Can be prevented by the killed (Salk vaccine, injectable) or the attenuated, live (Sabin vaccine, oral) polio vaccine.

Cotton Leaf Curl Disease (CLCuD)

Cause: Begomovirus.

Transmission: Transmitted by the whitefly (Bemisia tabaci).

Symptoms: Initially characterized by a deep downward cupping of the youngest leaves, followed by the development of cup-shaped, leaf-like enations on the underside of leaves. Severe curling, vein thickening, and stunting of the plant occur.

Control: Mainly based on insecticide treatments against the whitefly vector and the development of resistant cotton varieties. It has caused massive production losses in Pakistan.

PRIONS AND VIROIDS
The idea of an infectious agent that did not use nucleic acids and proteins together was considered impossible. However, pioneering work by Nobel Prize-winning biologist Stanley Prusiner has confirmed that such agents exist. Prions and viroids are acellular infectious particles like viruses but are even simpler and smaller.

Prions
Prions (proteinaceous infectious particles) are infectious particles, smaller than viruses, that contain no nucleic acids (neither DNA nor RNA). Electron microscopy reveals filaments. Prions are much more resistant to inactivation by ultraviolet light and heat than viruses. They are composed of a single protein, which is encoded by a normal cellular gene but has an abnormal shape. Fatal neurodegenerative diseases, such as Kuru in humans and bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE or "mad cow disease") in cattle, are transmitted by prions.

Viroids
Viroids are plant pathogens that consist of a short, circular, single-stranded RNA molecule without a protein coat or envelope. Viroid RNA does not code for any protein. Their replication involves the host's RNA polymerase II. Some viroids are ribozymes, having catalytic properties that allow self-cleavage. They cause several plant diseases (e.g., in potato, coconut, apple, peach). The only human disease known to be caused by a viroid is hepatitis D, though it requires the hepatitis B virus for its capsid.